5 WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS Delayed healing (5.1) Cross-sensitivity or hypersensitivity (5.2) Increased bleeding time due to interference with thrombocyte aggregation (5.3) Corneal effects including keratitis (5.4) 5.1 Delayed Healing Topical nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) may slow or delay healing. Topical corticosteroids are also known to slow or delay healing. Concomitant use of topical NSAIDs and topical steroids may increase the potential for healing problems. 5.2 Cross-Sensitivity or Hypersensitivity There is the potential for cross-sensitivity to acetylsalicylic acid, phenylacetic acid derivatives, and other NSAIDs. There have been reports of bronchospasm or exacerbation of asthma associated with the use of ketorolac tromethamine ophthalmic solution in patients who have either a known hypersensitivity to aspirin/non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs or a past medical history of asthma. Therefore, caution should be used when treating individuals who have previously exhibited sensitivities to these drugs. 5.3 Increased Bleeding Time With some NSAIDs, there exists the potential for increased bleeding time due to interference with thrombocyte aggregation. There have been reports that ocularly applied nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs may cause increased bleeding of ocular tissues (including hyphemas) in conjunction with ocular surgery. It is recommended that ketorolac tromethamine ophthalmic solution be used with caution in patients with known bleeding tendencies or who are receiving other medications, which may prolong bleeding time. 5.4 Corneal Effects Use of topical NSAIDs may result in keratitis. In some susceptible patients, continued use of topical NSAIDs may result in epithelial breakdown, corneal thinning, corneal erosion, corneal ulceration, or corneal perforation. These events may be sight threatening. Patients with evidence of corneal epithelial breakdown should immediately discontinue use of topical NSAIDs and should be closely monitored for corneal health. Postmarketing experience with topical NSAIDs suggests that patients with complicated ocular surgeries, corneal denervation, corneal epithelial defects, diabetes mellitus, ocular surface diseases (e.g., dry eye syndrome), rheumatoid arthritis, or repeat ocular surgeries within a short period of time may be at increased risk for corneal adverse events which may become sight threatening. Topical NSAIDs should be used with caution in these patients. Postmarketing experience with topical NSAIDs also suggests that use more than 1 day prior to surgery or use beyond 14 days post-surgery may increase patient risk for the occurrence and severity of corneal adverse events. 5.5 Contact Lens Wear Ketorolac tromethamine ophthalmic solution should not be administered while wearing contact lenses.6 ADVERSE REACTIONS The following serious adverse reactions are described elsewhere in the labeling: Delayed Healing [see Warnings and Precautions ( 5.1 )] Cross-Sensitivity or Hypersensitivity [see Warnings and Precautions ( 5.2 )] Increased Bleeding Time [see Warnings and Precautions ( 5.3 )] Corneal Effects [see Warnings and Precautions ( 5.4 )] The most common adverse reactions occurring in 1 - 5% of patients included conjunctival hyperemia, corneal infiltrates, headache, ocular edema and ocular pain. (6.1) To report SUSPECTED ADVERSE REACTIONS, contact Allergan at 1-800-678-1605 or the FDA at 1-800-FDA-1088 or www.fda.gov/medwatch. 6.1 Clinical Studies Experience Because clinical studies are conducted under widely varying conditions, adverse reaction rates observed in the clinical studies of a drug cannot be directly compared to rates in the clinical studies of another drug and may not reflect the rates observed in practice. The most frequently reported adverse reactions for ketorolac tromethamine ophthalmic solution occurring in approximately 1 to 5% of the overall study population were conjunctival hyperemia, corneal infiltrates, headache, ocular edema, and ocular pain. The most frequent adverse reactions reported with the use of ketorolac tromethamine ophthalmic solutions have been transient stinging and burning on instillation. These reactions were reported by up to 40% of patients participating in clinical trials. Other adverse reactions occurring approximately in 1 to 10% of the time during treatment with other ketorolac tromethamine ophthalmic solutions included allergic reactions, corneal edema, iritis, ocular inflammation, ocular irritation, superficial keratitis, and superficial ocular infections. Other adverse reactions reported rarely with the use of ketorolac tromethamine ophthalmic solutions included: corneal ulcer, eye dryness, and visual disturbance (blurry vision). 6.2 Postmarketing Experience The following adverse reactions have been identified during postmarketing use of ketorolac tromethamine ophthalmic solutions in clinical practice. Because they are reported voluntarily from a population of unknown size, estimates of frequency cannot be made. The reactions, which have been chosen for inclusion due to either their seriousness, frequency of reporting, possible causal connection to topical ketorolac tromethamine ophthalmic solutions or a combination of these factors, include bronchospasm or exacerbation of asthma, corneal erosion, corneal perforation, corneal thinning and corneal melt, and epithelial breakdown [see Warnings and Precautions ( 5.2 , 5.4 )]. BOXED WARNING Cardiovascular Thrombotic Events · Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) cause an increased risk of serious cardiovascular thrombotic events, including myocardial infarction and stroke, which can be fatal. This risk may occur early in treatment and may increase with duration of use (see WARNINGS and PRECAUTIONS). · Ibuprofen Tablets is contraindicated in the setting of coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) surgery (see CONTRAINDICATIONS and WARNINGS). Gastrointestinal Risk NSAIDs cause an increased risk of serious gastrointestinal adverse events including bleeding, ulceration, and perforation of the stomach or intestines, which can be fatal. These events can occur at any time during use and without warning symptoms. Elderly patients are at greater risk for serious gastrointestinal events (see WARNINGS).ADVERSE REACTIONS The most frequent type of adverse reaction occurring with ibuprofen tablets is gastrointestinal. In controlled clinical trials the percentage of patients reporting one or more gastrointestinal complaints ranged from 4% to 16%. In controlled studies when ibuprofen tablets were compared to aspirin and indomethacin in equally effective doses, the overall incidence of gastrointestinal complaints was about half that seen in either the aspirin or indomethacin-treated patients. Adverse reactions observed during controlled clinical trials at an incidence greater than 1% are listed in the table. Those reactions listed in Column one encompass observations in approximately 3,000 patients. More than 500 of these patients were treated for periods of at least 54 weeks. Still other reactions occurring less frequently than 1 in 100 were reported in controlled clinical trials and from marketing experience. These reactions have been divided into two categories: Column two of the table lists reactions with therapy with ibuprofen tablets where the probability of a causal relationship exists: for the reactions in Column three, a causal relationship with ibuprofen tablets has not been established. Reported side effects were higher at doses of 3200 mg/day than at doses of 2400 mg or less per day in clinical trials of patients with rheumatoid arthritis. The increases in incidence were slight and still within the ranges reported in the table. Incidence Greater than 1%(but less than 3%) Probable Causal Relationship Precise Incidence Unknown (but less than 1%) Probable Causal Relationship** Precise Incidence Unknown (but less than 1%) Causal Relationship Unknown** GASTROINTESTINAL Nausea*, epigastric pain*, heartburn*, diarrhea, abdominal distress, nausea and vomiting, indigestion, constipation, abdominal cramps or pain, fullness of GI tract (bloating and flatulence) Gastric or duodenal ulcer with bleeding and/or perforation, gastrointestinal hemorrhage, melena, gastritis, hepatitis, jaundice, abnormal liver function tests; pancreatitis CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM Dizziness*, headache, nervousness Depression, insomnia, confusion, emotional liability, somnolence, aseptic meningitis with fever and coma (see PRECAUTIONS) Paresthesias, hallucinations, dream abnormalities, pseudo-tumor cerebri DERMATOLOGIC Rash*, (including maculopapular type), pruritus Vesiculobullous eruptions, urticaria, erythema multiforme, Stevens-Johnson syndrome, alopecia Toxic epidermal necrolysis, photoallergic skin reactions SPECIAL SENSES Tinnitus Hearing loss, amblyopia (blurred and/or diminished vision, scotomata and /or changes in color vision) (see PRECAUTIONS) Conjunctivitis, diplopia, optic neuritis, cataracts HEMATOLOGIC Neutropenia, agranulocytosis, aplastic anemia, hemolytic anemia (sometimes Coombs positive), thrombocytopenia with or without purpura, eosinophilia, decreases in hemoglobin and hematocrit (see PRECAUTIONS) Bleeding episodes (e.g., epistaxis, menorrhagia) METABOLIC/ENDOCRINE Decreased appetite Gynecomastia, hypoglycemic reaction, acidosis CARDIOVASCULAR Edema, fluid retention (generally responds promptly to drug discontinuation) (see PRECAUTIONS) Congestive heart failure in patients with marginal cardiac function, elevate blood pressure, palpitations Arrhythmias (sinus tachycardia, sinus bradycardia) ALLERGIC Syndrome of abdominal pain, fever, chills, nausea and vomiting; anaphylaxis; bronchospasm (see CONTRAINDICATIONS) Serum sickness, lupus erythematosus syndrome. Henoch-Schonlein vasculitis, angioedema RENAL Acute renal failure (see PRECAUTIONS), decreased creatinine clearance, poliuria, azotemia, cystitis, hematuria Renal papillary necrosis MISCELLANEOUS Dry eyes and mouth, gingival ulcer, rhinitis *Reactions occurring in 3% to 9% of patients treated with ibuprofen. (Those reactions occurring in less than 3% of the patients are unmarked). **Reactions are classified under “Probable Causal Relationship (PCR)” if there has been one positive rechallenge or if three or more cases occur which might be causally related. Reactions are classified under “CausalRelationship Unknown” if seven or more events have been reported but the criteria for PCR have not been met