ADVERSE REACTIONS Hydrocodone bitartrate and ibuprofen was administered to approximately 300 pain patients in a safety study that employed dosages and a duration of treatment sufficient to encompass the recommended usage (see DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION). Adverse event rates generally increased with increasing daily dose. The event rates reported below are from approximately 150 patients who were in a group that received one tablet of hydrocodone bitartrate and ibuprofen an average of three to four times daily. The overall incidence rates of adverse experiences in the trials were fairly similar for this patient group and those who received the comparison treatment, acetaminophen with 600 mg codeine 60 mg. The following lists adverse events that occurred with an incidence of 1% or greater in clinical trials of hydrocodone bitartrate and ibuprofen, without regard to the causal relationship of the events to the drug. To distinguish different rates of occurrence in clinical studies, the adverse events are listed as follows: name of adverse event = less than 3% adverse events marked with an asterisk* = 3% to 9% adverse event rates over 9% are in parentheses. Body as a whole: Abdominal pain*, Asthenia*; Fever; Flu syndrome; Headache (27%), Infection*, Pain. Cardiovascular: Palpitations; Vasodilation. Central Nervous System: Anxiety*; Confusion; Dizziness (14%); Hypertonia; Insomnia*; Nervousness*; Paresthesia; Somnolence (22%); Thinking abnormalities. Digestive: Anorexia, Constipation (22%); Diarrhea*; Dry Mouth, Dyspepsia (12%); Flatulence, Gastritis; Melena; Mouth ulcers; Nausea (12%), Thirst; Vomiting*. Metabolic and Nutritional Disorders: Edema*. Respiratory: Dyspnea; Hiccups; Pharyngitis; Rhinitis. Skin and Appendages: Pruritus*; Sweating*. Special Senses: Tinnitus. Urogenital: Urinary frequency. Incidence less than 1% Body as a Whole: Allergic reaction. Cardiovascular: Arrhythmia; Hypotension; Tachycardia. Central Nervous System: Agitation; Abnormal dreams; Decreased libido; Depression; Euphoria; Mood changes; Neuralgia; Slurred speech; Tremor, Vertigo. Digestive: Chalky stool; “Clenching teeth”; Dysphagia; Esophageal spasm; Esophagitis; Gastroenteritis; Glossitis; Liver enzyme elevation. Metabolic and Nutritional: Weight decrease. Musculoskeletal: Arthralgia; Myalgia. Respiratory: Asthma; Bronchitis; Hoarseness; Increased cough; Pulmonary congestion; Pneumonia; Shallow breathing; Sinusitis. Skin and Appendages: Rash; Urticaria. Special Senses: Altered vision; Bad taste; Dry eyes. Urogenital: Cystitis, Glyosuria; Impotence, Urinary incontinence; Urinary retention. WARNING: ADDICTION, ABUSE, AND MISUSE; RISK EVALUATION AND MITIGATION STRATEGY (REMS); LIFE-THREATENING RESPIRATORY DEPRESSION; ACCIDENTAL INGESTION; RISKS FROM CONCOMITANT USE WITH BENZODIAZEPINES OR OTHER CNS DEPRESSANTS; ULTRA-RAPID METABOLISM OF CODEINE AND OTHER RISK FACTORS FOR LIFE-THREATENING RESPIRATORY DEPRESSION IN CHILDREN; NEONATAL OPIOID WITHDRAWL SYNDROME; and INTERACTIONS WITH DRUGS AFFECTING CYTOCHROME P450 ISOENZYMES • Addiction, Abuse, and Misuse ASCOMP with CODEINE exposes patients and other users to the risks of opioid addiction, abuse, and misuse, which can lead to overdose and death. Assess each patient’s risk prior to prescribing ASCOMP with CODEINE, and monitor all patients regularly for the development of these behaviors and conditions [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1 )]. • Opioid Analgesic Risk Evaluation and Mitigation Strategy (REMS) To ensure that the benefits of opioid analgesics outweigh the risks of addiction, abuse and misuse, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has required a REMS for these products [see Warnings and Precautions ( 5.2 )]. Under the requirements of the REMS, drug companies with approved opioid analgesic products must make REMS-compliant educations programs available to healthcare providers. Healthcare providers are strongly encouraged to do all of the following: • complete a REMS-compliant education program, • counsel patients and/or their caregivers, with every prescription, on safe use, serious risks, storage, and disposal of these products, • emphasize to patients and their caregivers the importance of reading the Medication Guide every time it is provided by their pharmacist, and • consider other tools to improve patient, household, and community safety. • Life-Threatening Respiratory Depression Serious, life-threatening, or fatal respiratory depression may occur with use of ASCOMP with CODEINE. Monitor for respiratory depression, especially during initiation of ASCOMP with CODEINE or following a dose increase [see Warnings and Precautions ( 5.3 )]. • Accidental Ingestion Accidental ingestion of even one dose of ASCOMP with CODEINE, especially by children, can result in a fatal overdose of ASCOMP with CODEINE [see Warnings and Precautions ( 5.3 )]. • Risks From Concomitant Use With Benzodiazepines Or Other CNS Depressants Concomitant use of opioids with benzodiazepines or other central nervous system (CNS) depressants, including alcohol, may result in profound sedation, respiratory depression, coma, and death [see Warnings and Precautions ( 5.4, 5.8), Drug Interactions ( 7 )]. • Reserve concomitant prescribing of ASCOMP with CODEINE and benzodiazepines or other CNS depressants for use in patients for whom alternative treatment options are inadequate. • Limit dosages and durations to the minimum required. • Follow patients for signs and symptoms of respiratory depression and sedation. • Ultra-Rapid Metabolism of Codeine and Other Risk Factors for Life-Threatening Respiratory Depression in Children Life-threatening respiratory depression and death have occurred in children who received codeine. Most of the reported cases occurred following tonsillectomy and/or adenoidectomy, and many of the children had evidence of being an ultra-rapid metabolizer of codeine due to a CYP2D6 polymorphism. [see Warnings and Precautions ( 5.5 )]. ASCOMP with CODEINE is contraindicated in children younger than 12 years of age and in children younger than 18 years of age following tonsillectomy and/or adenoidectomy [see Contraindications ( 4 )]. Avoid the use of ASCOMP with CODEINE in adolescents 12 to 18 years of age who have other risk factors that may increase their sensitivity to the respiratory depressant effects of codeine. • Neonatal Opioid Withdrawal Syndrome Prolonged use of ASCOMP with CODEINE during pregnancy can result in neonatal opioid withdrawal syndrome, which may be life-threatening if not recognized and treated, and requires management according to protocols developed by neonatology experts. If opioid use is required for a prolonged period in a pregnant woman, advise the patient of the risk of neonatal opioid withdrawal syndrome and ensure that appropriate treatment will be available [see Warnings and Precautions ( 5.6 )]. • Interactions with Drugs Affecting Cytochrome P450 Isoenzymes The effects of concomitant use or discontinuation of cytochrome P450 3A4 inducers, 3A4 inhibitors, or 2D6 inhibitors with codeine are complex. Use of cytochrome P450 3A4 inducers, 3A4 inhibitors, or 2D6 inhibitors with ASCOMP with CODEINE requires careful consideration of the effects on codeine, and the active metabolite, morphine [see Warnings and Precautions ( 5.7, 5.8), Drug Interactions ( 7 )]. WARNING: ADDICTION, ABUSE, AND MISUSE; RISK EVALUATION AND MITIGATION STRATEGY (REMS); LIFE-THREATENING RESPIRATORY DEPRESSION; ACCIDENTAL INGESTION; RISKS FORM CONCOMITANT USE WITH BENZODIAZEPINES OR OTHER CNS DEPRESSANTS; ULTRA-RAPID METABOLISM OF CODEINE AND OTHER RISK FACTORS FOR LIFE-THREATENING RESPIRATORY DEPRESSION IN CHILDREN; NEONATAL OPIOID WITHDRAWAL SYNDROME; and INTERACTION WITH DRUGS AFFECTING CYTOCHROME P450 ISOENZYMES See full prescribing information for complete boxed warning. • ASCOMP with CODEINE exposes users to the risks of addiction, abuse, and misuse, which can lead to overdose and death. Assess patient’s risk before prescribing and monitor regularly for these behaviors and conditions. ( 5.1 ) • To ensure that the benefits of opioid analgesics outweigh the risks of addiction, abuse, and misuse, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has required a Risk Evaluation and Mitigation strategy (REMS) for these products. ( 5.2 ) • Serious, life-threatening, or fatal respiratory depression may occur. Monitor closely, especially upon initiation or following a dose increase. ( 5.3 ) • Accidental ingestion of ASCOMP with CODEINE, especially by children, can result in fatal overdose. ( 5.3 ) • Concomitant use of opioids or a barbiturate with benzodiazepines or other central nervous system (CNS) depressants, including alcohol, may result in profound sedation, respiratory depression, coma, and death. Reserve concomitant prescribing for use in patients for whom alternative treatment options are inadequate; limit dosages and durations to the minimum required; and follow patients for signs and symptoms of respiratory depression and sedation. ( 5.4 , 5.8, 7) • Life-threatening respiratory depression and death have occurred in children who received codeine; most cases followed tonsillectomy and/or adenoidectomy, and many of the children had evidence of being an ultra-rapid metabolizer of codeine due to a CYP2D6 polymorphism. ( 5.5 ) ASCOMP with CODEINE is contraindicated in children younger than 12 years of age and in children younger than 18 years of age following tonsillectomy and/or adenoidectomy ( 4 ). Avoid the use of ASCOMP with CODEINE in adolescents 12 to 18 years of age who have other risk factors that may increase their sensitivity to the respiratory depressant effects of codeine. • Prolonged use during pregnancy can result in neonatal opioid withdrawal syndrome, which may be life-threatening if not recognized and treated. If prolonged opioid use is required in a pregnant woman, advise the patient of the risk of neonatal opioid withdrawal syndrome and ensure that appropriate treatment will be available. ( 5.6 ) • The effects of concomitant use or discontinuation of cytochrome P450 3A4 inducers, 3A4 inhibitors, or 2D6 inhibitors with codeine are complex. Use of cytochrome P450 3A4 inducers, 3A4 inhibitors, or 2D6 inhibitors with ASCOMP with CODEINE requires careful consideration of the effects on codeine, and the active metabolite, morphine. ( 5.7 , 5.8, 7 )5 WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS • Life-Threatening Respiratory Depression in Patients with Chronic Pulmonary Disease or in Elderly, Cachectic, or Debilitated Patients: Monitor closely, particularly during initiation and titration. (5.8 ) • Adrenal Insufficiency: If diagnosed, treat with physiologic replacement of corticosteroids, and wean patient off the opioid. ( 5.10 ) • Severe Hypotension: Monitor during dose initiation and titration. Avoid use of ASCOMP with CODEINE in patients with circulatory shock. ( 5.11 ) • Risks of Use in Patients with Increased Intracranial Pressure, Brain Tumors, Head Injury, or Impaired Consciousness: Monitor for sedation and respiratory depression. Avoid use of ASCOMP with CODEINE in patients with impaired consciousness or coma. ( 5.12 ) 5.1 Addiction, Abuse, and Misuse ASCOMP with CODEINE contains codeine. Codeine in combination with butalbital, aspirin, and caffeine is a Schedule III controlled substance. As ASCOMP with CODEINE contains butalbital and codeine, it exposes users to the risks of addiction, abuse, and misuse [see Drug Abuse and Dependence (9) ]. Although the risk of addiction in any individual is unknown, it can occur in patients appropriately prescribed ASCOMP with CODEINE. Addiction can occur at recommended dosages and if the drug is misused or abused. Assess each patient’s risk for addiction, abuse, or misuse prior to prescribing ASCOMP with CODEINE, and monitor all patients receiving ASCOMP with CODEINE for the development of these behaviors and conditions. Risks are increased in patients with a personal or family history of substance abuse (including drug or alcohol abuse or addiction) or mental illness (e.g., major depression). The potential for these risks should not, however, prevent the proper management of pain in any given patient. Patients at increased risk may be prescribed opioids such as ASCOMP with CODEINE but use in such patients necessitates intensive counseling about the risks and proper use of ASCOMP with CODEINE along with intensive monitoring for signs of addiction, abuse, and misuse. Opioids and barbiturates are sought by drug abusers and people with addiction disorders and are subject to criminal diversion. Consider these risks when prescribing or dispensing ASCOMP with CODEINE. Strategies to reduce these risks include prescribing the drug in the smallest appropriate quantity and advising the patient on the proper disposal of unused drug [see Patient Counseling Information (17) ]. Contact local state professional licensing board or state controlled substances authority for information on how to prevent and detect abuse or diversion of this product. 5.2 Opioid Analgesic Risk Evaluation and Mitigation Strategy (REMS) To ensure that the benefits of opioid analgesics outweigh the risks of addiction, abuse, and misuse, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has required a Risk Evaluation and Mitigation Strategy (REMS) for these products. Under the requirements of the REMS, drug companies with approved opioid analgesic products must make REMS-compliant education programs available to healthcare providers. Healthcare providers are strongly encouraged to do all of the following: • Complete a REMS-compliant education program offered by an accredited provider of continuing education (CE) or another education program that includes all the elements of the FDA Education Blueprint for Health Care Providers Involved in the Management or Support of Patients with Pain. • Discuss the safe use, serious risks, and proper storage and disposal of opioid analgesics with patients and/or their caregivers every time these medicines are prescribed. The Patient Counseling Guide (PCG) can be obtained at this link: www.fda.gov/OpioidAnalgesicREMSPCG. • Emphasize to patients and their caregivers the importance of reading the Medication Guide that they will receive from their pharmacist every time an opioid analgesic is dispensed to them. • Consider using other tools to improve patient, household, and community safety, such as patient-prescriber agreements that reinforce patient-prescriber responsibilities. To obtain further information on the opioid analgesic REMS and for a list of accredited REMS CME/CE, call 1-800-503-0784, or log on to www.opioidanalgesicrems.com . The FDA Blueprint can be found at www.fda.gov/OpioidAnalgesicREMSBlueprint. 5.3 Life-Threatening Respiratory Depression Serious, life-threatening, or fatal respiratory depression has been reported with the use of opioids, even when used as recommended. Respiratory depression, if not immediately recognized and treated, may lead to respiratory arrest and death. Management of respiratory depression may include close observation, supportive measures, and use of opioid antagonists, depending on the patient’s clinical status [see Overdosage (10) ]. Carbon dioxide (CO2) retention from opioid-induced respiratory depression can exacerbate the sedating effects of opioids. While serious, life-threatening, or fatal respiratory depression can occur at any time during the use of ASCOMP with CODEINE, the risk is greatest during the initiation of therapy or following a dosage increase. Monitor patients closely for respiratory depression, especially within the first 24-72 hours of initiating therapy with and following dosage increases of ASCOMP with CODEINE. To reduce the risk of respiratory depression, proper dosing and titration of ASCOMP with CODEINE are essential [see Dosage and Administration (2.1)]. Overestimating the ASCOMP with CODEINE dosage when converting patients from another opioid product can result in a fatal overdose with the first dose. Accidental ingestion of ASCOMP with CODEINE, especially by children, can result in respiratory depression and death due to an overdose of codeine and butalbital. Opioids can cause sleep-related breathing disorders including central sleep apnea (CSA) and sleep-related hypoxemia. Opioid use increases the risk of CSA in a dose-dependent fashion. In patients who present with CSA, consider decreasing the opioid dosage using best practices for opioid taper [see Dosage and Administration (2.3)]. 5.4 Risks from Concomitant Use with Benzodiazepines or Other CNS Depressants Profound sedation, respiratory depression, coma, and death may result from the concomitant use of ASCOMP with CODEINE with benzodiazepines or other CNS depressants (e.g., non-benzodiazepine sedatives/hypnotics, anxiolytics, tranquilizers, muscle relaxants, general anesthetics, antipsychotics, other opioids, alcohol). Because of these risks, reserve concomitant prescribing of these drugs for use in patients for whom alternative treatment options are inadequate. Observational studies have demonstrated that concomitant use of opioid analgesics and benzodiazepines increases the risk of drug-related mortality compared to use of opioid analgesics alone. Because of similar pharmacological properties, it is reasonable to expect similar risk with the concomitant use of other CNS depressant drugs with opioid analgesics [see Drug Interactions (7) ]. If the decision is made to prescribe a benzodiazepine or other CNS depressant concomitantly with an opioid analgesic, prescribe the lowest effective dosages and minimum durations of concomitant use. In patients already receiving an opioid analgesic, prescribe a lower initial dose of the benzodiazepine or other CNS depressant than indicated in the absence of an opioid, and titrate based on clinical response. If an opioid analgesic is initiated in a patient already taking a benzodiazepine or other CNS depressant, prescribe a lower initial dose of the opioid analgesic, and titrate based on clinical response. Follow patients closely for signs and symptoms of respiratory depression and sedation. Advise both patients and caregivers about the risks of respiratory depression and sedation when ASCOMP with CODEINE is used with benzodiazepines or other CNS depressants (including alcohol and illicit drugs). Advise patients not to drive or operate heavy machinery until the effects of concomitant use of the benzodiazepine or other CNS depressant have been determined. Screen patients for risk of substance use disorders, including opioid abuse and misuse, and warn them of the risk for overdose and death associated with the use of additional CNS depressants including alcohol and illicit drugs [see Drug Interactions (7) and Patient Counseling Information (17) ]. 5.5 Ultra-Rapid Metabolism of Codeine and Other Risk Factors for Life-Threatening Respiratory Depression in Children Life-threatening respiratory depression and death have occurred in children who received codeine. Codeine is subject to variability in metabolism based upon CYP2D6 genotype (described below), which can lead to an increased exposure to the active metabolite morphine. Based upon postmarketing reports, children younger than 12 years old appear to be more susceptible to the respiratory depressant effects of codeine, particularly if there are risk factors for respiratory depression. For example, many reported cases of death occurred in the postoperative period following tonsillectomy and/or adenoidectomy, and many of the children had evidence of being ultra-rapid metabolizers of codeine. Furthermore, children with obstructive sleep apnea who are treated with codeine for post-tonsillectomy and/or adenoidectomy pain may be particularly sensitive to its respiratory depressant effect. Because of the risk of life-threatening respiratory depression and death: •ASCOMP with CODEINE is contraindicated for all children younger than 12 years of age [see Contraindications (4) ]. •ASCOMP with CODEINE is contraindicated for post-operative management in pediatric patients younger than 18 years of age following tonsillectomy and/or adenoidectomy [see Contraindications (4) ]. •Avoid the use of ASCOMP with CODEINE in adolescents 12 to 18 years of age who have other risk factors that may increase their sensitivity to the respiratory depressant effects of codeine unless the benefits outweigh the risks. Risk factors include conditions associated with hypoventilation, such as postoperative status, obstructive sleep apnea, obesity, severe pulmonary disease, neuromuscular disease, and concomitant use of other medications that cause respiratory depression. •As with adults, when prescribing ASCOMP with CODEINE for adolescents, healthcare providers should choose the lowest effective dose for the shortest period of time and inform patients and caregivers about these risks and the signs of morphine overdose [see Use in Specific Populations ( 8.4 ), Overdosage ( 10 )] Nursing Mothers At least one death was reported in a nursing infant who was exposed to high levels of morphine in breast milk because the mother was an ultra-rapid metabolizer of codeine. Breastfeeding is not recommended during treatment with ASCOMP with CODEINE [see Use in Specific Populations (8.2) ]. CYP2D6 Genetic Variability: Ultra-rapid metabolizer Some individuals may be ultra-rapid metabolizers because of a specific CYP2D6 genotype (gene duplications denoted as *1/*1xN or *1/*2xN). The prevalence of this CYP2D6 phenotype varies widely and has been estimated at 1 to 10% for Whites (European, North American), 3 to 4% for Blacks (African Americans), 1 to 2% for East Asians (Chinese, Japanese, Korean), and may be greater than 10% in certain racial/ethnic groups (i.e., Oceanian, Northern African, Middle Eastern, Ashkenazi Jews, Puerto Rican). These individuals convert codeine into its active metabolite, morphine, more rapidly and completely than other people. This rapid conversion results in higher than expected serum morphine levels. Even at labeled dosage regimens, individuals who are ultra-rapid metabolizers may have life-threatening or fatal respiratory depression or experience signs of overdose (such as extreme sleepiness, confusion, or shallow breathing) [see Overdosage (10) ]. Therefore, individuals who are ultra-rapid metabolizers should not use ASCOMP with CODEINE. 5.6 Neonatal Opioid Withdrawal Syndrome Prolonged use of ASCOMP with CODEINE during pregnancy can result in withdrawal in the neonate. Neonatal opioid withdrawal syndrome, unlike opioid withdrawal syndrome in adults, may be life-threatening if not recognized and treated, and requires management according to protocols developed by neonatology experts. Observe newborns for signs of neonatal opioid withdrawal syndrome and manage accordingly. Advise pregnant women using opioids for a prolonged period of the risk of neonatal opioid withdrawal syndrome and ensure that appropriate treatment will be available [see Use in Specific Populations ( 8.1 , 8.2 ), Patient Counseling Information ( 17 )]. 5.7 Risks of Interactions with Drugs Affecting Cytochrome P450 Isoenzymes The effects of concomitant use or discontinuation of cytochrome P450 3A4 inducers, 3A4 inhibitors, or 2D6 inhibitors with codeine are complex. Use of cytochrome P450 3A4 inducers, 3A4 inhibitors, or 2D6 inhibitors with ASCOMP with CODEINE requires careful consideration of the effects on codeine and the active metabolite, morphine. Cytochrome P450 3A4 Interaction The concomitant use of ASCOMP with CODEINE with all cytochrome P450 3A4 inhibitors, such as macrolide antibiotics (e.g., erythromycin), azole-antifungal agents (e.g., ketoconazole), and protease inhibitors (e.g., ritonavir) or discontinuation of a cytochrome P450 3A4 inducer such as rifampin, carbamazepine, and phenytoin, may result in an increase in codeine plasma concentrations with subsequently greater metabolism by cytochrome P450 2D6, resulting in greater morphine levels, which could increase or prolong adverse reactions and may cause potentially fatal respiratory depression. The concomitant use of ASCOMP with CODEINE with all cytochrome P450 3A4 inducers or discontinuation of a cytochrome P450 3A4 inhibitor may result in lower codeine levels, greater norcodeine levels, and less metabolism via 2D6 with resultant lower morphine levels. This may be associated with a decrease in efficacy, and in some patients, may result in signs and symptoms of opioid withdrawal. Follow patients receiving ASCOMP with CODEINE and any CYP3A4 inhibitor or inducer for signs and symptoms that may reflect opioid toxicity and opioid withdrawal when ASCOMP with CODEINE is used in conjunction with inhibitors and inducers of CYP3A4. If concomitant use of a CYP3A4 inhibitor is necessary or if a CYP3A4 inducer is discontinued, consider dosage reduction of ASCOMP with CODEINE until stable drug effects are achieved. Monitor patients for respiratory depression and sedation at frequent intervals. If concomitant use of a CYP3A4 inducer is necessary or if a CYP3A4 inhibitor is discontinued, consider increasing the ASCOMP with CODEINE dosage until stable drug effects are achieved. Monitor for signs of opioid withdrawal. [see Drug Interactions (7) ]. Risks of Concomitant Use or Discontinuation of Cytochrome P450 2D6 Inhibitors The concomitant use of ASCOMP with CODEINE with all cytochrome P450 2D6 inhibitors (e.g., amiodarone, quinidine) may result in an increase in codeine plasma concentrations and a decrease in active metabolite morphine plasma concentration which could result in an analgesic efficacy reduction or symptoms of opioid withdrawal. Discontinuation of a concomitantly used cytochrome P450 2D6 inhibitor may result in a decrease in codeine plasma concentration and an increase in active metabolite morphine plasma concentration which could increase or prolong adverse reactions and may cause potentially fatal respiratory depression. Follow patients receiving ASCOMP with CODEINE and any CYP2D6 inhibitor for signs and symptoms that may reflect opioid toxicity and opioid withdrawal when ASCOMP with CODEINE are used in conjunction with inhibitors of CYP2D6. If concomitant use with a CYP2D6 inhibitor is necessary, follow the patient for signs of reduced efficacy or opioid withdrawal and consider increasing the ASCOMP with CODEINE dosage. After stopping use of a CYP2D6 inhibitor, consider reducing the ASCOMP with CODEINE dosage and follow the patient for signs and symptoms of respiratory depression or sedation. [see Drug Interactions (7) ]. 5.8 Life-Threatening Respiratory Depression in Patients with Chronic Pulmonary Disease or in Elderly, Cachectic, or Debilitated Patients The use of ASCOMP with CODEINE in patients with acute or severe bronchial asthma in an unmonitored setting or in the absence of resuscitative equipment is contraindicated. Patients with Chronic Pulmonary Disease: ASCOMP with CODEINE-treated patients with significant chronic obstructive pulmonary disease or cor pulmonale, and those with a substantially decreased respiratory reserve, hypoxia, hypercapnia, or pre-existing respiratory depression are at increased risk of decreased respiratory drive including apnea, even at recommended dosages of ASCOMP with CODEINE [see Warnings and Precautions (5.8) ]. Elderly, Cachectic, or Debilitated Patients: Life-threatening respiratory depression is more likely to occur in elderly, cachectic, or debilitated patients because they may have altered pharmacokinetics or altered clearance compared to younger, healthier patients [see Warnings and Precautions (5.8) ]. Monitor such patients closely, particularly when initiating and titrating ASCOMP with CODEINE and when ASCOMP with CODEINE is given concomitantly with other drugs that depress respiration [see Warnings and Precautions (5.3) ]. Alternatively, consider the use of non-opioid analgesics in these patients. 5.9 Interaction with Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs) may potentiate the effects of morphine, codeine’s active metabolite, including respiratory depression, coma, and confusion. ASCOMP with CODEINE should not be used in patients taking MAOIs or within 14 days of stopping such treatment. 5.10 Adrenal Insufficiency Cases of adrenal insufficiency have been reported with opioid use, more often following greater than one month of use. Presentation of adrenal insufficiency may include non-specific symptoms and signs including nausea, vomiting, anorexia, fatigue, weakness, dizziness, and low blood pressure. If adrenal insufficiency is suspected, confirm the diagnosis with diagnostic testing as soon as possible. If adrenal insufficiency is diagnosed, treat with physiologic replacement doses of corticosteroids. Wean the patient off of the opioid to allow adrenal function to recover and continue corticosteroid treatment until adrenal function recovers. Other opioids may be tried as some cases reported use of a different opioid without recurrence of adrenal insufficiency. The information available does not identify any particular opioids as being more likely to be associated with adrenal insufficiency. 5.11 Severe Hypotension ASCOMP with CODEINE may cause severe hypotension including orthostatic hypotension and syncope in ambulatory patients. There is increased risk in patients whose ability to maintain blood pressure has already been compromised by a reduced blood volume or concurrent administration of certain CNS depressant drugs (e.g., phenothiazines or general anesthetics) [see Drug Interactions (7) ]. Monitor these patients for signs of hypotension after initiating or titrating the dosage of ASCOMP with CODEINE. In patients with circulatory shock, ASCOMP with CODEINE may cause vasodilation that can further reduce cardiac output and blood pressure. Avoid the use of ASCOMP with CODEINE in patients with circulatory shock. 5.12 Risks of Use in Patients with Increased Intracranial Pressure, Brain Tumors, Head Injury, or Impaired Consciousness In patients who may be susceptible to the intracranial effects of CO2 retention (e.g., those with evidence of increased intracranial pressure or brain tumors), ASCOMP with CODEINE may reduce respiratory drive, and the resultant CO2 retention can further increase intracranial pressure. Monitor such patients for signs of sedation and respiratory depression, particularly when initiating therapy with ASCOMP with CODEINE. Opioids may also obscure the clinical course in a patient with a head injury. Avoid the use of ASCOMP with CODEINE in patients with impaired consciousness or coma. 5.13 Risks of Use in Patients with Gastrointestinal Conditions Including Peptic Ulcer Disease ASCOMP with CODEINE is contraindicated in patients with known or suspected gastrointestinal obstruction, including paralytic ileus. The codeine in ASCOMP with CODEINE may cause spasm of the sphincter of Oddi. Opioids may cause increases in serum amylase. Monitor patients with biliary tract disease, including acute pancreatitis for worsening symptoms. Patients with a history of active peptic ulcer disease should avoid using aspirin, which can cause gastric mucosal irritation and bleeding. The aspirin in ASCOMP with CODEINE can cause GI side effects including stomach pain, heartburn, nausea, vomiting, and gross GI bleeding. Although minor upper GI symptoms, such as dyspepsia, are common and can occur anytime during therapy, physicians should remain alert for signs of ulceration and bleeding, even in the absence of previous GI symptoms. Physicians should inform patients about the signs and symptoms of GI side effects and what steps to take if they occur. 5.14 Increased Risk of Seizures in Patients with Seizure Disorders The codeine in ASCOMP with CODEINE may increase the frequency of seizures in patients with seizure disorders and may increase the risk of seizures occurring in other clinical settings associated with seizures. Monitor patients with a history of seizure disorders for worsened seizure control during ASCOMP with CODEINE therapy. 5.15 Withdrawal Do not abruptly discontinue ASCOMP with Codeine in a patient physically dependent on opioids. Rapid tapering of butalbital, aspirin, caffeine, and codeine phosphate capsules in a patient physically dependent on opioids may lead to a withdrawal syndrome and return of pain [see Dosage and Administration (2.3), Drug Abuse and Dependence (9.3)]. Additionally, avoid the use of mixed agonist/antagonist (e.g., pentazocine, nalbuphine, and butorphanol) or partial agonist (e.g., buprenorphine) analgesics in patients who are receiving a full opioid agonist analgesic, including ASCOMP with CODEINE. In these patients, mixed agonist/antagonist and partial agonist analgesics may reduce the analgesic effect and/or precipitate withdrawal symptoms. [see Drug Interactions (7)]. When discontinuing ASCOMP with CODEINE in a physically-dependent patient, gradually taper the dosage [see Dosage and Administration (2.3) ]. Abrupt discontinuation of butalbital can cause seizures [see Drug Abuse and Dependence ( 9.3 )]. 5.16 Risks of Driving and Operating Machinery ASCOMP with CODEINE may impair the mental or physical abilities needed to perform potentially hazardous activities such as driving a car or operating machinery. Warn patients not to drive or operate dangerous machinery unless they are tolerant to the effects of ASCOMP with CODEINE and know how they will react to the medication. 5.17 Coagulation Abnormalities and Bleeding Risks Even low doses of aspirin can inhibit platelet function leading to an increase in bleeding time. This can adversely affect patients with inherited (i.e. hemophilia) or acquired (i.e. liver disease or vitamin K deficiency) bleeding disorders. Aspirin is contraindicated in patients with hemophilia. Aspirin administered pre-operatively may prolong the bleeding time. Patients who consume three or more alcoholic drinks every day should be counseled about the bleeding risks involved with chronic, heavy alcohol use while taking aspirin. 5.18 Reye’s Syndrome Aspirin should not be used in children or teenagers for viral infections, with or without fever, because of the risk of Reye syndrome with concomitant use of aspirin in certain viral illnesses. 5.19 Allergy Aspirin is contraindicated in patients with known allergy to nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug products (NSAIDs) and in patients with the syndrome of asthma, rhinitis, and nasal polyps. Aspirin may cause severe urticaria, angioedema, or bronchospasm (asthma). 5.20 Drug/Laboratory Test Interactions Aspirin: Aspirin may interfere with the following laboratory determinations in blood: serum amylase, fasting blood glucose, cholesterol, protein, serum glutamic-oxalacetic transaminase (SGOT), uric acid, prothrombin time and bleeding time. Aspirin may interfere with the following laboratory determinations in urine: glucose, 5-hydroxy-indoleacetic acid, Gerhardt ketone, vanillylmandelic acid (VMA), uric acid, diacetic acid, and spectrophotometric detection of barbiturates. Codeine: Codeine may increase serum amylase levels.6 ADVERSE REACTIONS The following serious adverse reactions are described, or described in greater detail, in other sections: •Addiction, Abuse, and Misuse [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1) ] •Life-Threatening Respiratory Depression [see Warnings and Precautions (5.3) ] •Interactions with Benzodiazepines or Other CNS Depressants [see Warnings and Precautions (5.4) •Ultra-Rapid Metabolism of Codeine and Other Risk Factors for Life-Threatening Respiratory Depression in Children [see Warnings and Precautions (5.5) ] •Neonatal Opioid Withdrawal Syndrome [see Warnings and Precautions (5.6) ] •Adrenal Insufficiency [see Warnings and Precautions (5.10) ] •Severe Hypotension [see Warnings and Precautions (5.11) ] •Gastrointestinal Adverse Reactions [see Warnings and Precautions (5.13) ] •Seizures [see Warnings and Precautions (5.14) ] •Withdrawal [see Warnings and Precautions (5.15) ] •Coagulation Abnormalities and Bleeding [see Warnings and Precautions (5.17) ] •Reye’s Syndrome [see Warnings and Precautions (5.18) ] •Allergy [see Warnings and Precautions (5.19) ] Most common adverse reactions (incidence > 1%) are nausea and/or abdominal pain, drowsiness, and dizziness. ( 6 ) To report SUSPECTED ADVERSE REACTIONS, contact Nexgen Pharma at 1-888-710-0006 or online at www.nexgenpharma.com or FDA at 1-800-FDA-1088 or www.fda.gov/medwatch. 6.1 Clinical Trials Experience Because clinical trials are conducted under widely varying conditions, adverse reaction rates observed in the clinical trials of a drug cannot be directly compared to rates in the clinical trials of another drug and may not reflect the rates observed in practice. Incidence in Controlled Clinical Trials: The following table summarizes the incidence rates of the adverse events reported by at least 1% of the Butalbital, Aspirin, Caffeine, and Codeine Phosphate, USP Capsules treated patients in controlled clinical trials comparing Butalbital, Aspirin, Caffeine, and Codeine Phosphate, USP Capsules to placebo, and provides a comparison to the incidence rates reported by the placebo-treated patients. The prescriber should be aware that these figures cannot be used to predict the incidence of side effects in the course of usual medical practice where patient characteristics and other factors differ from those that prevailed in the clinical trials. Similarly, the cited frequencies cannot be compared with figures obtained from other clinical investigations involving different treatments, uses, and investigators. Adverse Events Reported by at Least 1% of Butalbital, Aspirin, Caffeine, and Codeine Phosphate, USP Capsules Treated Patients During Placebo Controlled Clinical Trials Incidence Rate of Adverse Events Body System/Adverse Event Butalbital, Aspirin, Caffeine, and Codeine Phosphate, USP Capsules (N=382) Placebo (N =377) Central Nervous Drowsiness 2.4% 0.5% Dizziness/Lightheadedness 2.6% 0.5% Intoxicated Feeling 1.0% 0% Gastrointestinal Nausea/Abdominal Pain 3.7% 0.8% Other Adverse Events Reported During Controlled Clinical Trials The listing that follows represents the proportion of the 382 patients exposed to Butalbital, Aspirin, Caffeine, and Codeine Phosphate, USP Capsules while participating in the controlled clinical trials who reported, on at least one occasion, an adverse event of the type cited. All reported adverse events, except those already presented in the previous table, are included. It is important to emphasize that, although the adverse events reported did occur while the patient was receiving Butalbital, Aspirin, Caffeine, and Codeine Phosphate, USP Capsules, the adverse events were not necessarily caused by Butalbital, Aspirin, Caffeine, and Codeine Phosphate, USP Capsules. Adverse events are classified by body system and frequency. “Frequent” is defined as an adverse event which occurred in at least 1/100 (1%) of the patients; all adverse events listed in the previous table are frequent. “Infrequent” is defined as an adverse event that occurred in less than 1/100 patients but at least 1/1000 patients. All adverse events tabulated below are classified as infrequent. Central Nervous: headache, shaky feeling, tingling, agitation, fainting, fatigue, heavy eyelids, high energy, hot spells, numbness, and sluggishness. Autonomic Nervous: dry mouth and hyperhidrosis. Gastrointestinal: vomiting, difficulty swallowing, and heartburn. Cardiovascular: tachycardia. Musculoskeletal: leg pain and muscle fatigue. Genitourinary: diuresis. Miscellaneous: pruritus, fever, earache, nasal congestion, and tinnitus. The following adverse drug reactions have been reported with the components of ASCOMP with CODEINE. Potential effects of high dosage are listed in the [see Overdosage (10) ] section of this insert. Aspirin: occult blood loss, hemolytic anemia, iron deficiency anemia, gastric distress, heartburn, nausea, peptic ulcer, prolonged bleeding time, acute airway obstruction, renal toxicity when taken in high doses for prolonged periods, impaired urate excretion, hepatitis. Caffeine: cardiac stimulation, irritability, tremor, dependence, nephrotoxicity, hyperglycemia. Codeine: nausea, vomiting, drowsiness, lightheadedness, constipation, pruritus. 6.2 Postmarketing Experience The following adverse reactions have been identified during post approval use of Butalbital, Aspirin, Caffeine, and Codeine Phosphate, USP Capsules. Because these reactions are reported voluntarily from a population of uncertain size, it is not always possible to reliably estimate their frequency or establish a causal relationship to drug exposure. Central Nervous: abuse, addiction, anxiety, depression, disorientation, hallucination, hyperactivity, insomnia, libido decrease, nervousness, neuropathy, psychosis, sedation, sexual activity increase, slurred speech, twitching, unconsciousness, vertigo. Autonomic Nervous: epistaxis, flushing, miosis, salivation. Gastrointestinal: anorexia, appetite increased, constipation, diarrhea, esophagitis, gastroenteritis, gastrointestinal spasm, hiccup, mouth burning, pyloric ulcer. Cardiovascular: chest pain, hypotensive reaction, palpitations, syncope. Skin: erythema, erythema multiforme, exfoliative dermatitis, hives, rash, toxic epidermal necrolysis. Urinary: kidney impairment, urinary difficulty. Miscellaneous: allergic reaction, anaphylactic shock, cholangiocarcinoma, drug interaction with erythromycin (stomach upset), edema. Serotonin syndrome: Cases of serotonin syndrome, a potentially life-threatening condition, have been reported during concomitant use of opioids with serotonergic drugs. Adrenal insufficiency: Cases of adrenal insufficiency have been reported with opioid use, more often following greater than one month of use. Anaphylaxis: Anaphylaxis has been reported with ingredients contained in ASCOMP with CODEINE. Androgen deficiency: Cases of androgen deficiency have occurred with chronic use of opioids [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.2) ].