WARNING: RISK OF SERIOUS CARDIOVASCULAR AND GASTROINTESTINAL EVENTS WARNING: RISK OF SERIOUS CARDIOVASCULAR AND GASTROINTESTINAL EVENTS See full prescribing information for complete boxed warning. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) cause an increased risk of serious cardiovascular thrombotic events, including myocardial infarction and stroke, which can be fatal. This risk may occur early in treatment and may increase with duration of use (5.1) FLECTOR PATCH is contraindicated in the setting of coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) surgery (4, 5.1) NSAIDs cause an increased risk of serious gastrointestinal (GI) adverse events including bleeding, ulceration, and perforation of the stomach or intestines, which can be fatal. These events can occur at any time during use and without warning symptoms. Elderly patients and patients with a prior history of peptic ulcer disease and/or GI bleeding are at greater risk for serious GI events (5.2) Cardiovascular Thrombotic Events Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) cause an increased risk of serious cardiovascular thrombotic events, including myocardial infarction and stroke, which can be fatal. This risk may occur early in treatment and may increase with duration of use [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1) ]. FLECTOR PATCH is contraindicated in the setting of coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) surgery [see Contraindications (4) and Warnings and Precautions (5.1) ]. Gastrointestinal Bleeding, Ulceration, and Perforation NSAIDs cause an increased risk of serious gastrointestinal (GI) adverse events including bleeding, ulceration, and perforation of the stomach or intestines, which can be fatal. These events can occur at any time during use and without warning symptoms. Elderly patients and patients with a prior history of peptic ulcer disease and/or GI bleeding are at greater risk for serious GI events [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2) ].5 WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS Hepatotoxicity: Inform patients of warning signs and symptoms of hepatotoxicity. Discontinue if abnormal liver tests persist or worsen or if clinical signs and symptoms of liver disease develop (5.3) Hypertension: Patients taking some antihypertensive medications may have impaired response to these therapies when taking NSAIDs. Monitor blood pressure (5.4, 7) Heart Failure and Edema: Avoid use of FLECTOR PATCH in patients with severe heart failure unless benefits are expected to outweigh risk of worsening heart failure (5.5) Renal Toxicity: Monitor renal function in patients with renal or hepatic impairment, heart failure, dehydration, or hypovolemia. Avoid use of FLECTOR PATCH in patients with advanced renal disease unless benefits are expected to outweigh risk of worsening renal function (5.6)• Anaphylactic Reactions: Seek emergency help if an anaphylactic reaction occurs (5.7) Exacerbation of Asthma Related to Aspirin Sensitivity: FLECTOR PATCH is contraindicated in patients with aspirin-sensitive asthma. Monitor patients with preexisting asthma (without aspirin sensitivity) (5.8) Serious Skin Reactions: Discontinue FLECTOR PATCH at first appearance of skin rash or other signs of hypersensitivity (5.9) Premature Closure of Fetal Ductus Arteriosus: Avoid use in pregnant women starting at 30 weeks gestation (5.10, 8.1) Hematologic Toxicity: Monitor hemoglobin or hematocrit in patients with any signs or symptoms of anemia (5.11, 7) 5.1 Cardiovascular Thrombotic Events Clinical trials of several COX-2 selective and nonselective NSAIDs of up to three years duration have shown an increased risk of serious cardiovascular (CV) thrombotic events, including myocardial infarction (MI) and stroke, which can be fatal. Based on available data, it is unclear that the risk for CV thrombotic events is similar for all NSAIDs. The relative increase in serious CV thrombotic events over baseline conferred by NSAID use appears to be similar in those with and without known CV disease or risk factors for CV disease. However, patients with known CV disease or risk factors had a higher absolute incidence of excess serious CV thrombotic events, due to their increased baseline rate. Some observational studies found that this increased risk of serious CV thrombotic events began as early as the first weeks of treatment. The increase in CV thrombotic risk has been observed most consistently at higher doses. To minimize the potential risk for an adverse CV event in NSAID-treated patients, use the lowest effective dose for the shortest duration possible. Physicians and patients should remain alert for the development of such events, throughout the entire treatment course, even in the absence of previous CV symptoms. Patients should be informed about the symptoms of serious CV events and the steps to take if they occur. There is no consistent evidence that concurrent use of aspirin mitigates the increased risk of serious CV thrombotic events associated with NSAID use. The concurrent use of aspirin and an NSAID, such as diclofenac, increases the risk of serious gastrointestinal (GI) events [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2) ]. Status Post Coronary Artery Bypass Graft (CABG) Surgery Two large, controlled clinical trials of a COX-2 selective NSAID for the treatment of pain in the first 10–14 days following CABG surgery found an increased incidence of myocardial infarction and stroke. NSAIDs are contraindicated in the setting of CABG [see Contraindications (4) ]. Post-MI Patients Observational studies conducted in the Danish National Registry have demonstrated that patients treated with NSAIDs in the post-MI period were at increased risk of reinfarction, CV-related death, and all-cause mortality beginning in the first week of treatment. In this same cohort, the incidence of death in the first year post-MI was 20 per 100 person years in NSAID-treated patients compared to 12 per 100 person years in non-NSAID exposed patients. Although the absolute rate of death declined somewhat after the first year post-MI, the increased relative risk of death in NSAID users persisted over at least the next four years of follow-up. Avoid the use of FLECTOR PATCH in patients with a recent MI unless the benefits are expected to outweigh the risk of recurrent CV thrombotic events. If FLECTOR PATCH is used in patients with a recent MI, monitor patients for signs of cardiac ischemia. 5.2 Gastrointestinal Bleeding, Ulceration, and Perforation NSAIDs, including diclofenac, cause serious gastrointestinal (GI) adverse events including inflammation, bleeding, ulceration, and perforation of the esophagus, stomach, small intestine, or large intestine, which can be fatal. These serious adverse events can occur at any time, with or without warning symptoms, in patients treated with NSAIDs. Only one in five patients who develop a serious upper GI adverse event on NSAID therapy is symptomatic. Upper GI ulcers, gross bleeding, or perforation caused by NSAIDs occurred in approximately 1% of patients treated for 3-6 months, and in about 2%-4% of patients treated for one year. However, even short-term NSAID therapy is not without risk. Risk Factors for GI Bleeding, Ulceration, and Perforation Patients with a prior history of peptic ulcer disease and/or GI bleeding who used NSAIDs had a greater than 10-fold increased risk for developing a GI bleed compared to patients without these risk factors. Other factors that increase the risk of GI bleeding in patients treated with NSAIDs include longer duration of NSAID therapy; concomitant use of oral corticosteroids, aspirin, anticoagulants, or selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs); smoking; use of alcohol; older age; and poor general health status. Most postmarketing reports of fatal GI events occurred in elderly or debilitated patients. Additionally, patients with advanced liver disease and/or coagulopathy are at increased risk for GI bleeding. Strategies to Minimize the GI Risks in NSAID-treated patients: Use the lowest effective dosage for the shortest possible duration. Avoid administration of more than one NSAID at a time. Avoid use in patients at higher risk unless benefits are expected to outweigh the increased risk of bleeding. For such patients, as well as those with active GI bleeding, consider alternate therapies other than NSAIDs. Remain alert for signs and symptoms of GI ulceration and bleeding during NSAID therapy. If a serious GI adverse event is suspected, promptly initiate evaluation and treatment, and discontinue FLECTOR PATCH until a serious GI adverse event is ruled out. In the setting of concomitant use of low-dose aspirin for cardiac prophylaxis, monitor patients more closely for evidence of GI bleeding [see Drug Interactions (7) ]. 5.3 Hepatotoxicity In clinical trials of oral diclofenac containing products, meaningful elevations (i.e., more than 3 times the ULN) of AST (SGOT) were observed in about 2% of approximately 5,700 patients at some time during diclofenac treatment (ALT was not measured in all studies). In a large open-label, controlled trial of 3,700 patients treated with oral diclofenac sodium for 2-6 months, patients were monitored first at 8 weeks and 1,200 patients were monitored again at 24 weeks. Meaningful elevations of ALT and/or AST occurred in about 4% of the 3,700 patients and included marked elevations (greater than 8 times the ULN) in about 1% of the 3,700 patients. In that open-label study, a higher incidence of borderline (less than 3 times the ULN), moderate (3-8 times the ULN), and marked (greater than 8 times the ULN) elevations of ALT or AST was observed in patients receiving diclofenac when compared to other NSAIDs. Elevations in transaminases were seen more frequently in patients with osteoarthritis than in those with rheumatoid arthritis. Almost all meaningful elevations in transaminases were detected before patients became symptomatic. Abnormal tests occurred during the first 2 months of therapy with diclofenac in 42 of the 51 patients in all trials who developed marked transaminase elevations. In postmarketing reports, cases of drug-induced hepatotoxicity have been reported in the first month, and in some cases, the first 2 months of therapy, but can occur at any time during treatment with diclofenac. Postmarketing surveillance has reported cases of severe hepatic reactions, including liver necrosis, jaundice, fulminant hepatitis with and without jaundice, and liver failure. Some of these reported cases resulted in fatalities or liver transplantation. In a European retrospective population-based, case-controlled study, 10 cases of diclofenac associated drug-induced liver injury with current use compared with non-use of diclofenac were associated with a statistically significant 4-fold adjusted odds ratio of liver injury. In this particular study, based on an overall number of 10 cases of liver injury associated with diclofenac, the adjusted odds ratio increased further with female gender, doses of 150 mg or more, and duration of use for more than 90 days. Physicians should measure transaminases at baseline and periodically in patients receiving long-term therapy with diclofenac, because severe hepatotoxicity may develop without a prodrome of distinguishing symptoms. The optimum times for making the first and subsequent transaminase measurements are not known. Based on clinical trial data and postmarketing experiences, transaminases should be monitored within 4 to 8 weeks after initiating treatment with diclofenac. However, severe hepatic reactions can occur at any time during treatment with diclofenac. If abnormal liver tests persist or worsen, if clinical signs and/or symptoms consistent with liver disease develop, or if systemic manifestations occur (e.g., eosinophilia, rash, abdominal pain, diarrhea, dark urine, etc.), FLECTOR PATCH should be discontinued immediately. Inform patients of the warning signs and symptoms of hepatotoxicity (e.g., nausea, fatigue, lethargy, diarrhea, pruritus, jaundice, right upper quadrant tenderness, and 'flu-like' symptoms). If clinical signs and symptoms consistent with liver disease develop, or if systemic manifestations occur (e.g., eosinophilia, rash, etc.), discontinue FLECTOR PATCH immediately, and perform a clinical evaluation of the patient. To minimize the potential risk for an adverse liver related event in patients treated with FLECTOR PATCH, use the lowest effective dose for the shortest duration possible. Exercise caution when prescribing FLECTOR PATCH with concomitant drugs that are known to be potentially hepatotoxic (e.g., acetaminophen, antibiotics, anti-epileptics). 5.4 Hypertension NSAIDs, including FLECTOR PATCH, can lead to new onset of hypertension or worsening of preexisting hypertension, either of which may contribute to the increased incidence of CV events. Patients taking angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, thiazide diuretics, or loop diuretics may have impaired response to these therapies when taking NSAIDs [see Drug Interactions (7) ]. Monitor blood pressure (BP) during the initiation of NSAID treatment and throughout the course of therapy. 5.5 Heart Failure and Edema The Coxib and traditional NSAID Trialists' Collaboration meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials demonstrated an approximately two-fold increase in hospitalizations for heart failure in COX-2 selective-treated patients and nonselective NSAID-treated patients compared to placebo-treated patients. In a Danish National Registry study of patients with heart failure, NSAID use increased the risk of MI, hospitalization for heart failure, and death. Additionally, fluid retention and edema have been observed in some patients treated with NSAIDs. Use of diclofenac may blunt the CV effects of several therapeutic agents used to treat these medical conditions (e.g., diuretics, ACE inhibitors, or angiotensin receptor blockers [ARBs]) [see Drug Interactions (7) ]. Avoid the use of FLECTOR PATCH in patients with severe heart failure unless the benefits are expected to outweigh the risk of worsening heart failure. If FLECTOR PATCH is used in patients with severe heart failure, monitor patients for signs of worsening heart failure. 5.6 Renal Toxicity and Hyperkalemia Renal Toxicity Long-term administration of NSAIDs has resulted in renal papillary necrosis and other renal injury. Renal toxicity has also been seen in patients in whom renal prostaglandins have a compensatory role in the maintenance of renal perfusion. In these patients, administration of an NSAID may cause a dose-dependent reduction in prostaglandin formation and, secondarily, in renal blood flow, which may precipitate overt renal decompensation. Patients at greatest risk of this reaction are those with impaired renal function, dehydration, hypovolemia, heart failure, liver dysfunction, those taking diuretics and ACE inhibitors or ARBs, and the elderly. Discontinuation of NSAID therapy is usually followed by recovery to the pretreatment state. No information is available from controlled clinical studies regarding the use of FLECTOR PATCH in patients with advanced renal disease. The renal effects of FLECTOR PATCH may hasten the progression of renal dysfunction in patients with pre-existing renal disease. Correct volume status in dehydrated or hypovolemic patients prior to initiating FLECTOR PATCH. Monitor renal function in patients with renal or hepatic impairment, heart failure, dehydration, or hypovolemia during use of FLECTOR PATCH [see Drug Interactions (7) ]. Avoid the use of FLECTOR PATCH in patients with advanced renal disease unless the benefits are expected to outweigh the risk of worsening renal function. If FLECTOR PATCH is used in patients with advanced renal disease, monitor patients for signs of worsening renal function. Hyperkalemia Increases in serum potassium concentration, including hyperkalemia, have been reported with use of NSAIDs, even in some patients without renal impairment. In patients with normal renal function, these effects have been attributed to a hyporeninemic-hypoaldosteronism state. 5.7 Anaphylactic Reactions Diclofenac has been associated with anaphylactic reactions in patients with and without known hypersensitivity to diclofenac and in patients with aspirin-sensitive asthma [see Contraindications (4) and Warnings and Precautions (5.8) ]. Seek emergency help if an anaphylactic reaction occurs. 5.8 Exacerbation of Asthma Related to Aspirin Sensitivity A subpopulation of patients with asthma may have aspirin-sensitive asthma which may include chronic rhinosinusitis complicated by nasal polyps; severe, potentially fatal bronchospasm; and/or intolerance to aspirin and other NSAIDs. Because cross-reactivity between aspirin and other NSAIDs has been reported in such aspirin-sensitive patients, FLECTOR PATCH is contraindicated in patients with this form of aspirin sensitivity [see Contraindications (4) ]. When FLECTOR PATCH is used in patients with preexisting asthma (without known aspirin sensitivity), monitor patients for changes in the signs and symptoms of asthma. 5.9 Serious Skin Reactions NSAIDs, including diclofenac, can cause serious skin adverse reactions such as exfoliative dermatitis, Stevens-Johnson Syndrome (SJS), and toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN), which can be fatal. These serious events may occur without warning. Inform patients about the signs and symptoms of serious skin reactions, and to discontinue the use of FLECTOR PATCH at the first appearance of skin rash or any other sign of hypersensitivity. FLECTOR PATCH is contraindicated in patients with previous serious skin reactions to NSAIDs [see Contraindications (4) ]. 5.10 Premature Closure of Fetal Ductus Arteriosus Diclofenac may cause premature closure of the fetal ductus arteriosus. Avoid use of NSAIDs, including FLECTOR PATCH, in pregnant women starting at 30 weeks of gestation (third trimester) [see Use in Specific Populations (8.1) ]. 5.11 Hematologic Toxicity Anemia has occurred in NSAID-treated patients. This may be due to occult or gross blood loss, fluid retention, or an incompletely described effect on erythropoiesis. If a patient treated with FLECTOR PATCH has any signs or symptoms of anemia, monitor hemoglobin or hematocrit. NSAIDs, including FLECTOR PATCH, may increase the risk of bleeding events. Co-morbid conditions such as coagulation disorders, concomitant use of warfarin, other anticoagulants, antiplatelet agents (e.g., aspirin), serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and serotonin norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs) may increase this risk. Monitor these patients for signs of bleeding [see Drug Interactions (7) ]. 5.12 Masking of Inflammation and Fever The pharmacological activity of FLECTOR PATCH in reducing inflammation, and possibly fever, may diminish the utility of diagnostic signs in detecting infections. 5.13 Laboratory Monitoring Because serious GI bleeding, hepatotoxicity, and renal injury can occur without warning symptoms or signs, consider monitoring patients on long-term NSAID treatment with a CBC and a chemistry profile periodically [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2, 5.3, 5.6) ]. 5.14 Accidental Exposure in Children Even a used Flector Patch contains a large amount of diclofenac epolamine (as much as 170 mg). The potential therefore exists for a small child or pet to suffer serious adverse effects from chewing or ingesting a new or used Flector Patch. It is important for patients to store and dispose of Flector Patch out of the reach of children and pets. 5.15 Eye Exposure Avoid contact of Flector Patch with eyes and mucosa. Advise patients that if eye contact occurs, immediately wash out the eye with water or saline and consult a physician if irritation persists for more than an hour. 5.16 Oral Nonsteroidal Anti-inflammatory Drugs Concomitant use of oral and topical NSAIDs may result in a higher rate of hemorrhage, more frequent abnormal creatinine, urea and hemoglobin. Do not use combination therapy with Flector Patch and an oral NSAID unless the benefit outweighs the risk.6 ADVERSE REACTIONS The following adverse reactions are discussed in greater detail in other sections of the labeling: Cardiovascular Thrombotic Events [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1) ] GI Bleeding, Ulceration and Perforation [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2) ] Hepatotoxicity [see Warnings and Precautions (5.3) ] Hypertension [see Warnings and Precautions (5.4) ] Heart Failure and Edema [see Warnings and Precautions (5.5) ] Renal Toxicity and Hyperkalemia [see Warnings and Precautions (5.6) ] Anaphylactic Reactions [see Warnings and Precautions (5.7) ] Serious Skin Reactions [see Warnings and Precautions (5.9) ] Hematologic Toxicity [see Warnings and Precautions (5.11) ] Most common adverse reactions are application site conditions, occurring in 11% and 12%, respectively, of FLECTOR PATCH and Placebo Patch-treated patients (6.1) To report SUSPECTED ADVERSE REACTIONS, contact Pfizer Inc. at 1-800-438-1985 or FDA at 1-800-FDA-1088 or www.fda.gov/medwatch. 6.1 Clinical Trials Experience Because clinical trials are conducted under widely varying conditions, adverse reaction rates observed in the clinical trials of a drug cannot be directly compared with rates in the clinical trials of another drug and may not reflect the rates observed in practice. In controlled trials during the premarketing development of FLECTOR PATCH, approximately 600 patients with minor sprains, strains, and contusions were treated with FLECTOR PATCH for up to two weeks. Adverse Events Leading to Discontinuation of Treatment In the controlled trials, 3% of patients in both the FLECTOR PATCH and placebo patch groups discontinued treatment due to an adverse event. The most common adverse events leading to discontinuation were application site reactions, occurring in 2% of both the FLECTOR PATCH and placebo patch groups. Application site reactions leading to dropout included pruritus, dermatitis, and burning. Common Adverse Events Localized Reactions Overall, the most common adverse events associated with FLECTOR PATCH treatment were skin reactions at the site of treatment. Table 1 lists all adverse events, regardless of causality, occurring in ≥ 1% of patients in controlled trials of FLECTOR PATCH. A majority of patients treated with FLECTOR PATCH had adverse events with a maximum intensity of 'mild' or 'moderate.' Table 1. Common Adverse Events (by body system and preferred term) in ≥ 1% of Patients treated with FLECTOR PATCH or Placebo Patch The table lists adverse events occurring in placebo-treated patients because the placebo-patch was comprised of the same ingredients as FLECTOR PATCH except for diclofenac. Adverse events in the placebo group may therefore reflect effects of the non-active ingredients. Category Diclofenac N=572 Placebo N=564 N Percent N Percent Application Site Conditions 64 11 70 12 Pruritus 31 5 44 8 Dermatitis 9 2 3 <1 Burning 2 <1 8 1 OtherIncludes: application site dryness, irritation, erythema, atrophy, discoloration, hyperhidriosis, and vesicles. 22 4 15 3 Gastrointestinal Disorders 49 9 33 6 Nausea 17 3 11 2 Dysgeusia 10 2 3 <1 Dyspepsia 7 1 8 1 OtherIncludes: gastritis, vomiting, diarrhea, constipation, upper abdominal pain, and dry mouth. 15 3 11 2 Nervous System Disorders 13 2 18 3 Headache 7 1 10 2 Paresthesia 6 1 8 1 Somnolence 4 1 6 1 Other Includes: hypoesthesia, dizziness, and hyperkinesias. 4 1 3 <1 Foreign labeling describes that dermal allergic reactions may occur with FLECTOR PATCH treatment. Additionally, the treated area may become irritated or develop itching, erythema, edema, vesicles, or abnormal sensation. 5 WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS Delayed healing (5.1) Cross-sensitivity or hypersensitivity (5.2) Increased bleeding time due to interference with thrombocyte aggregation (5.3) Corneal effects including keratitis (5.4) 5.1 Delayed Healing Topical nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) may slow or delay healing. Topical corticosteroids are also known to slow or delay healing. Concomitant use of topical NSAIDs and topical steroids may increase the potential for healing problems. 5. 2 Cross-Sensitivity or Hypersensitivity There is the potential for cross-sensitivity to acetylsalicylic acid, phenylacetic acid derivatives, and other NSAIDs. There have been reports of bronchospasm or exacerbation of asthma associated with the use of ketorolac tromethamine ophthalmic solution in patients who either have a known hypersensitivity to aspirin/non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, or a past medical history of asthma. Therefore, caution should be used when treating individuals who have previously exhibited sensitivities to these drugs. 5. 3 Increased Bleeding Time With some NSAIDs, there exists the potential for increased bleeding time due to interference with thrombocyte aggregation. There have been reports that ocularly applied nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs may cause increased bleeding of ocular tissues (including hyphemas) in conjunction with ocular surgery. It is recommended that ACUVAIL ophthalmic solution be used with caution in patients with known bleeding tendencies or who are receiving other medications, which may prolong bleeding time. 5. 4 Corneal E ffects Use of topical NSAIDs may result in keratitis. In some susceptible patients, continued use of topical NSAIDs may result in epithelial breakdown, corneal thinning, corneal erosion, corneal ulceration, or corneal perforation. These events may be sight threatening. Patients with evidence of corneal epithelial breakdown should immediately discontinue use of topical NSAIDs and should be closely monitored for corneal health. Postmarketing experience with topical NSAIDs suggests that patients with complicated ocular surgeries, corneal denervation, corneal epithelial defects, diabetes mellitus, ocular surface diseases (e.g., dry eye syndrome), rheumatoid arthritis, or repeat ocular surgeries within a short period of time may be at increased risk for corneal adverse events which may become sight threatening. Topical NSAIDs should be used with caution in these patients. Postmarketing experience with topical NSAIDs also suggests that use more than 1 day prior to surgery or use beyond 14 days post-surgery may increase patient risk for the occurrence and severity of corneal adverse events. 5.5 Contact Lens Wear ACUVAIL should not be administered while wearing contact lenses.6 ADVERSE REACTIONS Because clinical studies are conducted under widely varying conditions, adverse reaction rates observed in the clinical studies of a drug cannot be directly compared to the rates in the clinical studies of another drug and may not reflect the rates observed in practice. Most common adverse reactions occurring in 1-6% of patients were increased intraocular pressure, conjunctival hemorrhage, and vision blurred. (6.1) To report SUSPECTED ADVERSE REACTIONS, contact Allergan at 1-800-678-1605 or FDA at 1-800-FDA-1088 or www.fda.gov/medwatch. 6.1 Clinical Studies Experience The most common adverse reactions were reported in 1-6% of patients and included increased intraocular pressure, conjunctival hyperemia and/or hemorrhage, corneal edema, ocular pain, headache, tearing and vision blurred. Some of these reactions may be the consequence of the cataract surgical procedure. 6.2 Postmarketing Experience The following adverse reactions have been identified during postmarketing use of ketorolac tromethamine ophthalmic solutions in clinical practice. Because they are reported voluntarily from a population of unknown size, estimates of frequency cannot be made. The reactions, which have been chosen for inclusion due to either their seriousness, frequency of reporting, possible causal connection to topical ketorolac tromethamine ophthalmic solutions or a combination of these factors, include bronchospasm, exacerbation of asthma, corneal erosion, corneal perforation, corneal thinning and corneal melt, epithelial breakdown [see Warnings and Precautions ( 5.2 , 5.4 )] and ulcerative keratitis.